\documentclass[12pt]{article}

\usepackage{amsmath}
\usepackage{graphicx,psfrag,epsf,amssymb}
\usepackage{enumerate}
\usepackage[top=1.0in, bottom=1.0in, left=1.0in, right=1.0in, headheight=1.0in]{geometry}
\usepackage{hyperref}
\usepackage{pdfpages} % To include activity worksheets
\usepackage{float}
\usepackage{natbib}
\usepackage{enumitem}
\newlist{todolist}{itemize}{2}
\setlist[todolist]{label=$\square$}

\newcommand{\blind}{0}

\newcommand{\todo}[1]{{\color{blue}[[\textbf{TODO: }#1]]}}

\date{December 15, 2019}

\begin{document}
\def\spacingset#1{\renewcommand{\baselinestretch}%
{#1}\small\normalsize} \spacingset{1}


%%%%%%%%%%%% DEFINING TITLE FOR PAPER & REMOVAL FOR BLIND VERSION %%%%%%%%%%%%%%

\if1\blind
{
  \title{\bf Designing Data Science Workshops for Data-Intensive Environmental 
  Science Research}
  \author{Allison Theobold \thanks{The authors gratefully acknowledge the 
  \textit{National Network of Library of Medicine}
    Data Engagement PNR grant for supporting this research.} \hspace{.2cm}\\
    Department of Mathematical Sciences, Montana State University \\
    Bozeman, MT \\
    allisontheobold@montana.edu \\
    and \\
    Stacey Hancock \\
    Department of Mathematical Sciences, Montana State University \\
    stacey.hancock@montana.edu \\
    and \\
    Sara Mannheimer \\
    Montana State University Library \\
    sara.mannheimer@montana.edu
    }
  \maketitle 
} \fi

\if0\blind
{
  \title{\bf Designing Data Science Workshops for Data-Intensive Environmental Science Research}
  \author{Anonymous}
  \date{}
  \maketitle
} \fi
%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%

\bigskip

\begin{abstract}
% currently 186 words 

Over the last 20 years, statistics preparation has become vital for a broad 
range of scientific fields, and statistics coursework has been readily 
incorporated into undergraduate and graduate programs. However, a gap remains 
between the computational skills taught in statistics courses and those required
for the use of statistics in scientific research. Ten years after the 
publication of ``Computing in the Statistics Curriculum,'' the nature of 
statistics continues to change, and computing skills are more necessary than 
ever for modern scientific researchers. In this paper, we describe research on 
the design and implementation of a suite of data science workshops for 
environmental science graduate students, providing students with the skills 
necessary to retrieve, view, wrangle, visualize, and analyze their data using 
reproducible tools. These workshops fill a critical hole in the environmental 
science and statistics curricula, supporting students with opportunities to grow
in their skills for computing with data. Open to faculty, staff, and the larger
community, these workshops promote continued learning of the tools necessary for
working with data and provide additional resources for incorporating data 
science into the classroom.

\end{abstract}

\noindent %
{\it Keywords:}  data science, data visualization, data wrangling, \texttt{R}, 
environmental science, workshops, reproducible research 

\vfill

\newpage
\spacingset{1.45}

\section{Introduction}
\label{sec:intro}

\quad Scientific fields have seen profound increases in the volume and variety 
of data available for analysis. Matched with the growth in computational power, 
today's scientific researchers are faced with computational and statistical 
expectations beyond those of the coursework dictated by their curriculum. In the
environmental sciences, though statistics courses have been readily incorporated
into undergraduate and graduate curricula, an abundance of literature suggests 
that these curricula fail to equip graduate students with the computing skills 
necessary for research in their field (Andelman et al., \citeyear{andelman}; 
Green et al., \citeyear{green}; Hampton et al., \citeyear{hampton}; Hernandez et
al., \citeyear{hernandez}, Mislan, Heer, \& White, \citeyear{mislan}; Teal et 
al., \citeyear{datacarpentry}; Theobold and Hancock, \citeyear{theobold}). Only 
one of these studies \citep{theobold}, however, acknowledges the substantial 
role statistics courses could potentially play in students' acquisition of 
computational skills. 

\quad Over the last 10 years, a large number of statistics educators have echoed
Nolan and Temple Lang's call to ``embrace computing and integrate it fully into 
statistics undergraduate major and graduate programs" (Nolan and Temple Lang, 
\citeyear{nolan}, p. 97; Baumer, \citeyear{baumer_datascience}; Baumer, Horton, 
\& Wickham, \citeyear{horton_takingachance}; Cetinkaya-Rundel and Rundel, 
\citeyear{mine}; Cobb, \citeyear{cobb}; Hardin et al., \citeyear{hardin}; Horton
and Hardin, \citeyear{horton_thinkwithdata}; Kaplan, \citeyear{kaplan}; McNamara
and Horton, \citeyear{mcnamara}). Indeed, the American Statistical Association 
Curriculum Guidelines for Undergraduate Programs in Statistical Science 
\citep{asa} reflect the increasing importance of data science skills. Despite 
this campaign for computing in the statistics classroom, graduate-level 
statistics service courses have largely been overlooked, even though their 
potential impact is substantial. Unlike courses designed for an undergraduate or
graduate program in Statistics, these service courses often act as the sole 
exposure to computing with data prior to the start of a student's independent 
research. 

\quad The intention of this research is to (1) describe the computing skills 
necessary for research in the environmental sciences, (2) investigate how these 
skills can be infused into currently existing extracurricular workshops, and (3)
understand the experiences of attendees of these workshops. We consider the 
following research questions:
\begin{enumerate}
    \item What do environmental science faculty members identify as the key 
    computing skills graduate students require to implement statistics for 
    research in their field?   
    \item How can the key computing skills identified by environmental science 
    faculty be incorporated into currently existing workshop materials?  
    \item What are the experiences of individuals attending data science 
    workshops?  
\end{enumerate}

\quad To investigate these questions, we executed a three-phase design-based 
implementation research model \citep{penuel}. In the first phase, we conducted 
in-depth interviews with faculty from environmental science fields regarding the
computational skills they believe are necessary for graduate students to succeed
in their research. Phase two then focused on adapting currently existing 
workshop resources to design of a series of data science workshops targeting the
key computational skills distilled from these interviews. The final phase 
consisted of implementing the workshops and collecting survey responses from the
workshop attendees regarding their experiences participating in each workshop.  

\begin{figure}[h!]
    \centering
    \includegraphics[width = \textwidth, height = 2in]{images/data-science-explore.png}
    \caption{Data Analysis Cycle, Wickham, H. \& Grolemund, G. (2017) \emph{R 
    for Data Science}. Sebastopol, California: O'Reilly.}
\label{fig:cycle}
\end{figure}

\quad For this research, the collection of disciplines who perform research 
across a variety of environmental science fields are captured under the term 
``environmental science.'' At our institution, these are the fields of Ecology, 
Land Resources Environmental Sciences, Plant Sciences, and Animal and Range 
Sciences, whose students are required or highly recommended to complete 
graduate-level statistics coursework for a masters or doctoral degree. In this 
paper, the ``data analysis cycle'' consists of all stages in the data analysis 
process, from data importation to data exploration to the communication of 
results, where data modeling is but one component (Figure \ref{fig:cycle}). 
The ``data science skills'' necessary to engage in this cycle may include 
general programming concepts such as loops, user-defined functions, or 
conditional statements. However, the cornerstone of data science skills differs
fundamentally from general programming skills, with a focus on data rather than 
computer architecture, design, and applications. 

\quad We begin by outlining areas of research that address the computational and
statistical training of graduate students in the environmental sciences and the 
potential for extracurricular workshops to fill in the gaps. Next, we outline 
the design-based implementation research methodology used to design and 
implement a suite of data science workshops tailored to environmental science 
graduate students. Section \ref{sec:faculty} summarizes the first phase of 
research, which outlined the computational skills faculty members identified as 
necessary for graduate students to succeed in their independent research. Next, 
Section \ref{sec:workshops} discusses how these identified skills were 
interwoven into existing data science workshop materials for researchers in the 
environmental sciences. Section \ref{sec:implement} summarizes the backgrounds 
and experiences of the workshop attendees during the 2018-2019 academic year, 
and describes the research conducted on the implementation of the workshops. We 
then outline future research plans for a second iteration of this design work. 
To close, we revisit the current climate of computing in the statistics 
curriculum for service courses and describe how these types of extracurricular 
workshops can assist in further integration of computing into these classrooms. 

\section{The Current Climate of Statistics and Computing in the Environmental 
Sciences}
\label{sec:lit}

\quad Due to the substantial growth in the volume and variety of available data 
over the last two decades, the practice of environmental science has changed 
dramatically. Advances in technology have made computationally heavy 
applications of data science techniques---such as management and coalition of 
large data sets, high frequency spatial and temporal data visualization, and 
hierarchical Bayesian modeling---essential understandings for environmental 
science research. This flood of data has ``challenged the research community's 
capacity to readily learn and implement the concepts, techniques, and tools" 
\citep[p. 546]{hampton} necessary for data-intensive environmental science 
research, creating a crucial need to re-evaluate how our educational system can
better prepare current and future generations of researchers 
(\citeauthor{green}, \citeyear{green}; \citeauthor{hampton}, 
\citeyear{hampton}).  

\subsection{Computing in the Environmental Sciences Curriculum}

\quad Arising from a decade of mumblings \citep{andelman, dodds1, dodds2, eglen, 
green, hastings, kelling, wilson-software-carpentry, wilson, wing}, 2010 brought
two studies on the computational ill-preparation of environmental students by
their curriculum. First, Strasser and Hampton found that undergraduate students
were not being prepared with the data management tools necessary to engage in
environmental science research, as fewer than 20\% of instructors were including
key data management topics in their courses, such as workflows, databases,
and reproducibility. The importance of these skills, however, was affirmed by
the majority (77\%) of instructors. Yet, instructors largely stated that ``data
management should be taught in a different course'' (p.\ 10). The results of 
this study suggested that---across institutions---``data management education
is not currently a priority for ecology instructors'' (p.\ 10). That same year,
an environmental science graduate student led a large scale study of the
computational experiences of future environmental scientists 
\citep[p.\ 1068]{hernandez}. In a survey of environmental science graduate 
students across the United States, the authors found that over 74\% of the
students surveyed reported they had no skills in any programming 
language---including \texttt{R}---and only 17\% reported basic skill levels in
any programming language. Hence, a large number of students may be leaving their
graduate programs without the data science skills necessary for data-intensive
research in their field. Hernandez et al.\ suggested that student-focused
workshops could bridge this gap, by ``providing intensive environments'' where
students could learn ``particular methods or technologies'' (p.\ 1075). The
authors also noted that developing and offering these workshops would be simpler
than developing new courses to organize and implement. 

\quad Out of these calls for high-quality resources for scientific computing, 
emerged the Carpentries project \citep{carpentries}. Housing Data, Software, and
Library Carpentry, the Carpentries comprises ``communities of instructors, 
trainers, maintainers, helpers, and supporters'' all sharing the mission to 
``teach foundational computational and data science skills to researchers.'' 
These workshops address the need for ``good training resources for researchers 
looking to develop skills that will enable them to be more effective and 
productive'' \citep[p.\ 135]{carpentries}. Furthermore, these workshops are 
necessary, because ``training in data and computing skills is still largely 
absent from undergraduate and graduate programs,'' so ``most or all of what 
[researchers] know about data management, analysis, and sharing has been learned
piecemeal, or not learned at all'' (p.\ 136). Data Carpentry provides 
domain-specific training for researchers in the ``core data skills for 
efficient, shareable, and reproducible research practices'' 
\citep{data-carpentry}.  As part of this mission, the Carpentries
collaboratively develops publicly available lessons for specific populations
of researchers, which do not assume that attendees have any prior knowledge
before attending the workshops. Teal and colleagues acknowledge that, while 
the Data Carpentry workshops ``will not be able to teach researchers all of the
skills they need in two days,'' the workshops ``are a way to get started,''  
lowering the activation energy required and empowering researchers ``to be able
to conduct the analyses necessary for their work in an effective and 
reproducible way'' (p.\ 143). The success of these workshops can be viewed as 
a ``symptom of the current curriculum's shortcomings'' \citep[p.\ 547]{hampton}, 
as there continues to exist a ``paucity of systematic training within university
programs to equip students with the computational skills they need to conduct 
data-intensive research'' (p.\ 547). 

\quad Disappointingly, none of these conversations have acknowledged the 
substantial role students' statistics education potentially plays in their 
attainment of the data science skills necessary for research. Hampton and 
fellow environmental science researchers claim that ``three decades ago, 
environmental scientists were ill-prepared to use statistics in their research, 
and now statistics preparation is considered vital." In fact, in ecology today,
it is ``extremely difficult to publish a manuscript without any statistical 
testing'' \citep[p. 547]{hampton}. Furthermore, with the invention 
of the RStudio integrated development environment (IDE) \citep{rstudio}, the
software used throughout the data analysis cycle by environmental science
researchers has changed. In 2017, the number of studies in environmental science
journals reporting the use of \texttt{R} as the ``primary tool reported in data 
analysis'' was 58\%, compared to 11.4\% in 2008 \citep[p. 1]{Rpopular}. 
Moreover, the preponderance of environmental science graduate students are now 
required to produce code as part of their research \citep{mislan}. The clear 
need for data science proficiency in environmental science research requires a
transformation of the graduate curriculum similar to that which infused
statistics preparation into the required graduate coursework. 

\subsection{Computing in the Statistics Curriculum}

\quad Changes in the digital age have also had ``a profound impact on statistics
and the nature of data analysis" \citep[p. 97]{nolan}, with today's skills 
differing substantially from what was needed but five to ten years ago. 
In the year following the publication of ``Computing in the Statistics 
Curriculum'' \citep{nolan}, the Mckinsey Report \citep{mckinsey} was published. 
The McKinsey report stated that, by 2018, ``the United States alone could face a
shortage of 140,000 to 190,000 people with deep analytical skills as well as 1.5
million managers and analysts with the know-how to use the analysis of big data
to make effective decisions'' (p.\ 3). With calls to transform the undergraduate
statistics curriculum resounding nationally, the 2014 American Statistical 
Association (ASA) President, Nathaniel Schenker, convened a workgroup to update
the association's guidelines for undergraduate programs. These new guidelines 
included an increased emphasis on data science skills and real applications, 
specifically students' ability to ``access and manipulate data in various ways,
use a variety of computational approaches to extract meaning from data, program
in higher-level languages" \citep[p.\ 7]{asa}. 

\quad With this curricular momentum, in 2015, \emph{The American Statistician} 
produced a special issue on ``Statistics and the Undergraduate Curriculum,'' to
encourage submissions of broader topics in the statistics curriculum. Articles 
in the special issue ranged from detailing how computing should be included 
throughout the Statistics curriculum \citep{jenny, tintle, hesterberg}, to 
presenting thoughts on how data science topics should be integrated into 
undergraduate statistics courses, \citep{esr, grimshaw, 
baumer_datascience, hardin}. In the same issue, George Cobb provocatively stated
that the statistics curriculum needed to be rebuilt ``from the ground up'' 
(\citeyear{cobb}), as ``what we teach lags decades behind what we practice'' and
``the gap between our half-century-old curriculum and our contemporary 
statistical practice continues to widen'' (p.\ 268). Moreover, despite the 
issue's focus on the broader statistics curriculum, authors continued to lament 
that the current Introductory Statistics curriculum teaches a snapshot of the 
entire data analysis cycle, ``wherein challenges with data computational 
methods, and visualization and presentation are typically elided'' 
\citep[p.\ 336]{baumer_datascience}. 

\quad The following year, however, brought the revised GAISE college report 
\citep{gaise}, creating a push for reform in the Introductory Statistics 
curriculum. The six recommendations originally outlined by the committee in 2005
continued, but the authors suggested two new emphases for the first
recommendation (teach statistical thinking), which reflect the modern practice
of statistics. First, statistics educators should ``teach statistics as an
investigative process of problem-solving and decision making,'' and we should 
``give students experience with multivariable thinking'' (\citeyear{gaise}, 
p.\ 3). These recommendations reiterate the sentiments heard throughout the
statistics community, that students should emerge from our courses with the
understanding that data analysis ``isn't just inference and modeling, it's also
data importing, cleaning, preparation, exploration, and visualization'' 
\citep{mine-jsm}. Yet, the inclusion of these topics in the Introductory 
Statistics curriculum is still a heated discussion. Many educators continue to 
believe (1) that it is not possible to teach statistical concepts and 
programming in just one course, (2) that teaching programming takes up valuable
time which could be used towards teaching important statistical concepts, or 
(3) students are not interested in learning to program \citep{mine-jsm}. Thus, 
despite charges for the statistics community to ``treat computing as fundamental
as basic mathematics and writing'' \citep[p.\ 298]{esr}, many students leave
their Introductory Statistics course without ``a set of practices and attitudes
about data that are immediately applicable to their lives'' 
\citep[p.\ 309]{gould}. 

\quad Amidst these conversations, \texttt{R} packages were being created, which 
would fundamentally changing how users interact with \texttt{R}. These 
\texttt{R} packages, universally known as the ``\texttt{tidyverse},'' have 
created user friendly \texttt{R} tools which ``share an underlying design 
philosophy, grammar, and data structures'' \citep{tidyverse}. Statistics 
educators have begun to leverage these tools in the Introductory Statistics 
classroom to teach reproducibility \citep{mine-rmarkdown}, data management 
\citep{horton_takingachance}, dynamic data \citep{hardin-tise}, and big data
\citep{horton-tise}. While there exists a growing momentum to incorporate these
new \texttt{R} tools into the Introductory Statistics classroom, attention has 
yet to be paid to alternative statistics service courses, such as those taken 
by environmental science graduate students. These courses, like Introductory 
Statistics, serve graduate students from a variety of scientific backgrounds. 
However, unlike an undergraduate Introductory Statistics course, students are 
expected to emerge from their statistics coursework with the ability to 
complete the analyses required for their research. 

\quad The frustrations echoed by environmental science educators 
\citep{hampton, datacarpentry} suggest that, despite the inclusion of statistics 
coursework into these graduate programs, students continue to leave the 
statistics classroom without the data science skills necessary to participate in 
the data analysis cycle in their own research. The fundamental question raised 
ten years ago by Nolan and Temple Lang still applies today: do our students
leave the statistics classroom able to ``compute confidently, reliably, and
efficiently?'' (\citeyear{nolan}, p.\ 100). An in-depth study of environmental 
science graduate students' experiences acquiring the computing knowledge
necessary for their research answered this question with a resounding `no' 
\citep{theobold}. Like the hypothesis of Teal and colleagues (2015), these
students did not attribute their acquisition of the data science skills
necessary for their research to the statistics courses they took for their
degree. Rather, students gained the data science skills necessary to engage in
the entire data analysis cycle through independent research experiences, an
``all-knowing'' past or current graduate students, and peer networks. Ten years 
after the publication of ``Computing in the Statistics Curriculum,'' we continue
to assume that ``students will `pick up' the skills they need'' to participate 
in the data analysis cycle outside of their statistics coursework 
\citep[p.\ 309]{gould}. 


\subsection{Extracurricular Workshops to Bridge the Gap}

\quad Reiterated by both statistics education and environmental science 
researchers alike \citep{nolan, datacarpentry}, this lack of training in 
computational skills impedes the progress of scientific research, sends the 
signal to students that computing is not of intellectual importance, and is 
laden with hidden costs. Students may pick up bad habits, misunderstandings, or 
the wrong concepts, learn just enough to get what they need done, spend weeks or
months on tasks that could be done in hours or days, and they may be unaware of 
the reliability and reproducibility---or lack there of---of their results (Nolan
and Temple Lang, 2010, p. 100; Teal et al., 2015, p. 136). But why are these
skills still so rarely included in these service courses when the need for them
is widely recognized?

\quad Environmental science educators have reiterated the challenges in 
integrating computing into the curriculum outlined by Nolan and Temple Lang. 
These barriers can be boiled down to ``attempting to fit more material into
already-full courses and curriculum, which are taught by people who do not feel
prepared to address topics relevant to big data and data-intensive research'' 
\citep[p. 547]{hampton}. These hurdles are potentially even greater for 
graduate-level statistics service courses. Instructors of these courses are 
explicitly told the statistical content students are expected to learn, 
and are implicitly assumed to be teaching students the data science skills 
necessary for them to participate in the entire data analysis cycle. Claiming 
these graduate students ought to take additional, data science specific courses
to obtain these skills is infeasible for many, as graduate programs leave little
room for additional coursework. 

\quad Until computing has been meaningfully integrated into these service 
courses, extracurricular workshops hold the potential to address the gap between
the computational preparation of students by their coursework and the 
computational requirements of their research. Although data science skills can 
potentially be acquired from the drove of currently available online resources, 
such as online lessons, MOOCs and books, none of these resources provide
researchers with the ability to pose their questions directly to an instructor
or to learn from others. Moreover, this drove of online materials, poses a  
``significant challenge in being able to discover relevant and high-quality
materials,'' for researchers with limited time. 

\quad As, reiterated by Nolan and Temple Lang \citeyear{esr}, extracurricular
learning opportunities are not a direct substitute for the prolonged instruction
of these skills that occurs in a course, as ``students do not learn as much 
[...] or get the same extensive training in computing or visualization as
they would in a 6 or 10 week program'' (p.\ 295). However, this is not the goal 
of these learning opportunities. Instead, short, intensive workshops, such as
those provided by the Carpentries, are able to teach immediately useful skills
that can be taught and learned quickly, keep learners active by using live
coding and formative assessment, work with a learners from a variety of
backgrounds, and build learners' self efficacy \citep{null-carpentries}.
Additionally, because workshops are able to thrive outside of university
curricula, they hold the ability to ``adapt materials rapidly and remain on the
leading edge of technological development'' \citep[p.\ 547]{hampton}.
Furthermore, workshops offer the opportunity for a wide variety of researchers,
not just students, to acquire the data science skills necessary for
data-intensive research, supporting the broader community of researchers. 

\section{Methodology}

\quad Improving environmental science graduate students' access to ``powerful,
effective learning opportunities'' \citep[p. 137]{penuel} necessitates
understanding the skills required for these students to be successful in their
research. Design-based implementation research (DBIR) \citep{confrey, penuel,
oneill} ``offers a model for the design and testing of innovations
within the crucible of classrooms and other contexts for learning'' 
\citep[p.\ 140]{penuel}. Rather than creating workshops covering content outside
parties believe are important, DBIR uses collaboration with members of the
community to develop ``evidence-based improvements'' (p.\ 143) to teaching 
innovations---situating community members as ``co-designers of solutions to 
problems'' \citep[p. 140]{penuel} rather than bystanders. This collaboration 
is critical when developing resources for researchers in the broader scientific
community, as the discipline of Statistics was developed to support research in
other scientific disciplines to evaluate evidence obtained from data. 

\quad This paper describes the results of the first iteration of this DBIR, 
consisting of three phases. Section \ref{sec:faculty} summarizes the first phase
of this research, investigating the computing skills necessary for environmental
science research by graduate students. As the direct supervisors of graduate
students, environmental science faculty members are potentially aware of the
computing skills that are vital to researchers in their respective fields. Thus,
interviews with faculty members from these fields allow for us to gain an
understanding of the essential skills required of environmental science graduate
students. Phase two of this research, described in Section \ref{sec:workshops}, 
details how the skills identified during phase one were used to tailor
currently existing Data Carpentry \citeyear{data-carpentry} and Software
Carpentry \citeyear{software-carpentry} lessons to meet the needs of graduate
students in the environmental sciences. Finally, Section \ref{sec:implement}
chronicles the final phase of this research, implementing and evaluating these
workshops. This final evaluation phase focuses on the survey results of the 
backgrounds and experiences of workshop attendees, rather than the workshop
content or learning outcomes of attendees, which are described as directions for
future research. 


\section{Outlining the Computing Skills Necessary for Environmental Science Research}
\label{sec:faculty}

\quad In the spring of 2017 and fall of 2018, faculty members from diverse 
fields within the environmental sciences were invited to participate in a 
one-hour interview. All faculty members currently overseeing a graduate student
from the Ecology, Land Resources Environmental Science, Animal \& Range 
Sciences, and Plant Sciences \& Plant Pathology departments were emailed 
requesting their participation in this research. While some faculty 
enthusiastically agreed to participate, others declined for three main 
reasons---they hadn't directly overseen a graduate student recently, they deemed
themselves to be weak in statistics, or they were unavailable to meet. Table 
\ref{tab:faculty} outlines the number of faculty requested for participation and
the number of faculty interviewed, by department affiliation. 

{\spacingset{1.05}
\begin{table}[h!]
\centering
\begin{tabular}{lcc}
\hline
Department & Faculty Invited & Faculty Interviewed  \\
\hline
Animal \& Range Sciences & 7 & 2 \\
Ecology & 15 & 8 \\
Land Resources Environmental Sciences & 24 & 8 \\
Plant Sciences \& Plant Pathology &  15 & 5 \\ 
\hline
\end{tabular}
\caption{Number of faculty members requested for participation and interviewed,
by department.}
\label{tab:faculty}
\end{table}
}

\subsection{Data Collection}  

\quad Faculty agreeing to participate were interviewed regarding (1) the 
computational skills they believe are necessary for masters and doctoral 
students to implement statistics for research in their field, and (2) how they 
believe graduate students acquire these necessary skills. The full interview 
protocol is included in the GitHub repository associated with this manuscript 
\footnote{Materials associated with this manuscript are available at 
\href{https://github.com/atheobold/data-science-workshops-jse}{https://github.com/atheobold/data-science-workshops-jse}}.  

\quad Based on faculty's responses, the interviewer asked follow-up questions to
further explore why the faculty believe the computational skill(s) in question 
are necessary. For instance, if a faculty voiced the need for students to be 
able to build a data workflow, further information was sought regarding what 
specific computing skills this would require. Alternatively, when the response 
from faculty consisted of the statistical understandings necessary for graduate
student researchers, follow-up questions were asked to delve further into what
computing skills a student may require to successfully implement this type of
statistical analysis with their data. Not only did these interviews provide
valuable feedback on \emph{what} content the workshops should include, they also
added insight into \emph{why} workshops form an ideal mode of delivery for this
needed training.  

\subsection{Data Analysis} 

\quad The primary author lead a three-stage data analysis process (Miles, 
Huberman, Salada$\tilde{\text{n}}$a, \citeyear{miles}). During the first stage,
the interviews for every faculty member were transcribed verbatim. Following 
this process, the primary author read the transcripts independently, 
highlighting excerpts where computing skills were discussed. The author then 
created descriptive codes for the skills faculty identified as necessary in each
of these excerpts. At the close of this stage, the author examined these codes 
for specific references to computing skills currently addressed in Data 
Carpentry's \emph{Data Analysis and Visualization in \texttt{R} for Ecologists} 
lesson \citep{ecology_curriculum}. 

\quad Following this process, the primary author began the second stage of 
analytical coding. This stage acts as a method of synthesizing descriptive 
summaries, tying together ``different pieces of data into a recognizable 
cluster,'' demonstrating how the data are instances of a general concept 
\citep[p. 95]{miles}. During this stage, skills were linked thematically, and 
categories that held across multiple interviews were retained. For example, 
every faculty voiced students' need to work with data in \texttt{R}. These 
themes were initially categorized as ``working with data,'' with additional 
categories of data wrangling, and data visualization created. Next, the author
searched through these themes to uncover how each theme related to the others.
Through this process it was determined that certain categories captured similar
constructs, and were merged into a single category, whereas other constructs
were voiced independently, and separate categories were formed. For example,
while every faculty voiced students' need to work with data in \texttt{R}, these
sentiments were voiced alongside students' need to preform other data wrangling
operations, such as reorganize data, filtering out rows of data, selecting
columns, creating new variables, or modifying existing variables. Hence, the
themes of ``working with data'' and ``data wrangling'' were merged into the
single theme of ``working with data.'' Alternatively, while reproducibility is
a key aspect to working with data in \texttt{R}, the skills identified by
faculty which this theme captures were not voiced alongside a specific software.
However, when these faculty commented on the need for students' work to be 
reproducible, \texttt{R} was continually mentioned as the vehicle to support 
this need. 

\quad In the final stage of the analysis, the primary author searched the 
faculty transcripts for evidence supporting the emerging themes, scrutinizing 
whether each identified skill fit into the existing themes. Following this 
validation process, the first and second authors met to discuss the rationale
for each code and inspect the skills identified by faculty in the context of the
emergent themes. These final themes ground the theory for creating an effective
intervention promoting the acquisition of computing skills necessary for 
graduate-level environmental science research. reproducible
research

\subsection{Skills Identified by Environmental Science Faculty}

\quad While some faculty had difficulties disentangling the statistical methods
students use in research from the computing required to implement those methods,
many were able to express the expectations they held for graduate students in
their field throughout the entire data analysis cycle. A substantial overlap 
was seen between faculty expectations and the components of ``data acumen'' 
outlined by NAS \citep{nas}, with faculty expectations falling into three
categories: (1) working with and wrangling data, (2) data visualization, and (3)
reproducibilty.

\subsubsection{Working with Data}  

\quad All of the faculty interviewed believed that students' experiences in the
statistics classroom do not adequately prepare students to work with and
organize large, messy datasets. The need to manipulate large datasets is not
unique to the environmental sciences. In fact, a faculty member stated that it
is ``not uncommon to be analyzing half a million records, but I think it's
uncommon to be doing it effectively or efficiently.'' As graduate students
perform their research, they are required to assemble datasets for analyses.
This requires students to think about ``storing data, managing data, matching
data, and collating data," potentially merging a variety of data types into one
meaningful data set. Every faculty member emphasized that students need to know
how to ``organize their data and get it in a way that can be used by 
\texttt{R}.'' 

\quad Often included in these skills for working with data are tasks that 
require reorganizing data formats from wide to long or vice versa---a skill 
which every faculty member griped is not acquired through the standard 
curriculum. ``Most of them, when you're like `long form, wide form, samples as 
rows, variables as columns,' they kind of look at you like `what?'.'' Standard 
examples in statistics courses provide students with data which are the product
of cross-tabulation, so students are never forced ``to figure out how to get the
cross-tabulation you need, so that you can bring it into \texttt{R} and do your
regression.'' These concerns reiterate the importance of ``data management and 
curation'' detailed by NAS, who stated that ``at the heart of data science is
the storage, preparation, and accessing of data'' \citep[p.\ 26]{nas}. 

\subsubsection{Data Visualization} 

\quad The importance data visualization plays in every stage of students'
research was emphasized by every faculty member interviewed. Faculty affirmed
that students should possess the ability to create visualizations of their data
early, both for checks of data quality and to explore relationships. These 
expectations align with the the facility outlined by NAS (\citeyear{nas}), who
stated that students need to have the ability to ``present data in a clear and
compelling fashion'' (p.\ 26). One faculty member declared that students'
ability to look at their data in different ways dramatically shapes their
research potential, and the tools available today allow for researchers to
create visualizations precisely tailored for each investigation. Many faculty
voiced the usefulness of the \texttt{ggplot2} \citep{ggplot} package for
students' knowledge of producing data visualizations, lowering the barrier for
students to learn ``how to visualize [their] data to explore and understand
it.'' 

\subsubsection{Reproducibility}  

\quad Every faculty member emphasized the usefulness of ``manipulating data in
ways that are repeatable,'' through using such programs as \texttt{R}. Across
environmental science disciplines, faculty concurred that many students do not
use \texttt{R} for data wrangling. Instead, students rely on Excel because 
``they are not comfortable enough with the code or [\texttt{R}] is kind of a 
black box'' or that when they ``don't have that instant connection with [their]
data, I think it fundamentally boils down to fear.'' Concern was raised for the
students using Excel to wrangle their data, as ``they would never find [their]
way back to what the original data set would have been'' and that their advisers
would have no way to understand why data are missing. These advisers encourage
students to avoid these brute force Excel manipulations, yet students may not
have the computing skills necessary to perform the same data wrangling task in a
scripted and reproducible manner, as their courses provide little to no exposure
in carrying out the full data analysis cycle. These faculty concerns parallel 
the ``workflow and reproducibility'' acumen outlined by NAS, who stated that 
students need to ``be exposed to the concept of workflows'' and gain experience
with the ``software software systems that enable building workflows (e.g., 
\texttt{R} and Python) and how to document what they do (e.g., R Markdown and 
Jupyter Notebook)'' \citep[p.\ 28]{nas}. 

\subsubsection{How Students Gain Computational Skills}

\quad When asked why students are not acquiring computing skills in the courses
required for their degree, a faculty member stated, ``We don't really have
anyone to teach that. It's not that it isn't valuable, but there is no one to
teach it.'' When pressed as to why other faculty feel uncomfortable teaching
computing, this same faculty member stated, ``[they believe] most graduate
students come in knowing more about the tools one might use to manipulate data
than their advisers do.'' Other faculty bemoaned the gaps between the
computational skills of their graduate students and their own training, 
``I think that more and more in our field, my generation is sort of just 
catching up the next generation.'' These gaps impact the assistance faculty can
provide to their students, as ``increasingly faculty feel that they're not at 
the forefront of their programming abilities, so their students are being 
self-taught and are often computationally ahead of them.'' Many faculty 
lamented their own deficient computational abilities, with some stating that 
they ``feel personally out of touch, because [students] work in \texttt{R} and 
I haven't taken the time to learn \texttt{R}, because of my training and my
age.'' These faculty understand that often students are required to learn these
skills on their own because ``there is definitely a gap between the code I can
help them with.'' 

\quad Although faculty feel that there may exist gaps between their own
knowledge of working in \texttt{R} and their students', every faculty member
affirmed the importance of students acquiring the computational abilities needed
to perform data-intensive research. Indeed, it is not necessary for every
student to be an expert, but faculty underscored the value of resources for
students to acquire these computational skills necessary for their research. The
majority of faculty voiced that it is often assumed that graduate students
should be able to analyze their data because they've taken a statistics course.
Yet, faculty members acknowledge the poor computational preparation of their
students---even after taking a statistics course---and thus ``encourage
[students] to use anything they can find to get more tools in [their] tool
box.'' 

\section{Designing Data Science Workshops for Graduate Students in the 
Environmental Sciences}
\label{sec:workshops}

\quad The second phase of this research attended to the  development of a suite
of data science workshops targeted to graduate students in the environmental
sciences. Skills identified through faculty interviews were incorporated into a
set of four 3-hour workshops covering (1) the basics of programming in 
\texttt{R}, (2) intermediate programming tasks in \texttt{R}, (3) creating
appropriate and effective data visualizations, and (4) cleaning and merging data
in preparation for analysis and visualization, all using reproducible tools. 

\quad The first workshop in this series does not assume that attendees have any
previous experience working in \texttt{R}, and each workshop builds on knowledge
acquired at previous workshop(s), without the expectation that attendees have
acquired additional knowledge or skills between workshops. The materials for 
these workshops were adapted from Data Carpentry's \emph{Data Analysis and
Visualization in \texttt{R} for Ecologists} lesson \citep{ecology_curriculum}, a
curriculum maintained by experienced researchers in ecological fields, which 
uses ecology-specific data contexts \footnote{This work is a derivative of 
\emph{Data Analysis and Visualization in \texttt{R} for Ecologists} 
\href{https://datacarpentry.org/R-ecology-lesson/}{(https://datacarpentry.org/R-ecology-lesson/)}
by Data Carpentry, used under CC-BY 
\href{https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/}{(https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/)}.}. 
Using the themes which emerged in interviews with environmental science faculty,
we were able to tailor this workshop series to suit the needs of this population
of graduate students as they prepare for and participate in data-intensive
research. The workshop materials developed for this research are available
through GitHub
\footnote{\href{https://github.com/atheobold/data-science-workshops-jse}{GitHub
repository (link)}}, with video tutorials recorded and available through our
institution's library 
\footnote{\href{http://bit.ly/ws_recordings}{MSU Library videos (link)}}.  

%  Data Carpentry materials are freely available under the \href{https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0/}{Creative Commons Attribution License}, for re-use or adaptation

\subsection{Participant-Centered Learning}  

\quad These workshops are taught in a technology-enhanced active learning (TEAL)
classroom that seats up to 35 individuals. The room's monitors make it easy for 
attendees to watch as the instructor live codes, and the open layout of the room
allows helpers to engage with attendees as they work. Each workshop has one lead
instructor and two to three workshop assistants. During each workshop, topics
are introduced by the instructor, followed by a group discussion of an example. 
Finally, attendees group up to complete a set of hands-on tasks, applying the
concepts covered in that section of the workshop. These tasks allow for
attendees to ``learn the computational aspects as part of an interesting, 
challenging, and confidence-building process'' \citep[p. 101]{nolan}.

% Similar to the practice advocated by the Carpentries, as
% attendees work in groups to tackle the task at hand, they are instructed to
% place a colored sticky note on their computer, to signal assistants for help.    
% 
% This group dialogue creates an inclusive space where attendees are able
% to pose questions or conjectures to the group while the instructor live codes
% questions asked or suggestions. 

\subsection{Data Context}  

\quad Emphasized by both the NAS and these faculty, ``effective application of
data science to a domain requires knowledge of that domain'' \citep[p.\ 29]{nas}. 
Hence, data science instruction ought to be grounded in ``substantive contextual
examples,'' to ``ensure that data scientists develop the capacity to pose and
answer questions'' with data relevant to them (p.\ 30). Therefore, the data used
in the creation of these workshops are ecological in nature, originating from
Montana Fish, Wildlife, and Parks and the Portal Project Teaching Database 
\citep{portal_data}. These data highlight a variety of aspects that commonly
occur in environmental data, including multiple sampling instances,
mark-recapture, biological measurements, and meta- and micro-level data. 

% \quad The data from Montana Fish, Wildlife, and Parks contain entries of 18,352 fish caught over the span of ten years on the Blackfoot River in central Montana. Each row of the data contains information for a single captured fish, and the columns represent: the trip number, section of river sampled, length, weight, and species of the fish, and whether the fish had been previously captured. The Portal Project Teaching Database contains three separate data files of time-series data collected on a small mammal community in southern Arizona: micro-level data on the rodents captured on individual plots, macro-level data on rodent species, and taxa, and macro-level data on the treatments applied to different plots. 

\subsection{Computing Tools for Environmental Science Research}  

\quad The structure and context of these workshops include a statistical
programming language used extensively throughout environmental science research
(\texttt{R}), environments which facilitate the learning of \texttt{R}
(RStudio and RStudio Cloud), and tools that promote reproducibility throughout
the entire data analysis cycle (R Markdown).

\subsubsection{Why \texttt{R}?} 

\quad The use of \texttt{R} is widespread throughout the environmental science
research community, a dramatic change over the last decade \citep{Rpopular}. 
Presently, \texttt{R} includes over 100 packages frequently used in ecological
data analysis, as highlighted in the CRAN Task View: Analysis of Ecological and
Environmental Data \href{https://CRAN.R-project.org/view=Environmetrics}{(https://CRAN.R-project.org/view=Environmetrics)}. Furthermore, with the invention of the RStudio IDE 
\citep{rstudio}, this user-ship continues to increase. \texttt{R} is free and
open source, so attendees learn a statistical programming language that will be
accessible to them throughout their careers. Furthermore, unlike other data
analysis software used by environmental scientists, such as program MARK,
VORTEX, or RMAS, with \texttt{R}, their results do not depend on remembering the
sequence of buttons they clicked. With the shocking realization that large 
numbers of modern scientific findings cannot be replicated \citep{economist, 
johnson} and the growing appreciation for reproducible methods of data analysis
in ecological research \citep{reproducibilty-comment, repeatability, pva,
reproducibility_ecology}, today's researchers in scientific fields are becoming 
more aware of the need for a reproducible data analysis workflow. 

\subsubsection{Why RStudio?}

\quad RStudio is a free computer application that allows you access to the 
resources of \texttt{R}, while providing you with a comfortable working
environment \citep{rstudio}. The RStudio integrated development environment 
(IDE) ``makes [programming] less intimidating than the bare \texttt{R} shell" 
\citep[p. 59]{mine}. Additionally, the RStudio environment is consistent across
operating systems, which is not the case for other statistical software
packages. Because RStudio is an IDE, it includes integrated help files,
intelligent code completion, and syntax highlighting---all of which help to
reduce the learning curve. Furthermore, RStudio makes reproducibility simple
with dynamic \texttt{R Markdown} documents, allowing for a full integration of
the data analysis workflow.

\subsubsection{Why RStudio Cloud?} 

\quad The RStudio Cloud was created as a platform to make it easy to do, share,
teach and learn data science using \texttt{R} \citep{RStudioCloud}. Through the 
Cloud, attendees are able to access publicly available workshop materials, 
without worrying about software installation, package installation, or
transferring data. Each workshop is contained in an organized RStudio project
directory, so attendees are exposed to best practices for reproducible project 
construction. Workshop participants interact with the workshop's materials in
the same manner as a locally installed version of RStudio, as seen in Figure
\ref{fig:cloud}. 

\begin{figure}[t!]
    \centering
    \includegraphics[width = \textwidth]{images/RStudio_Cloud_blind.png}
    \caption{RStudio Cloud workspace environment for \emph{Data Visualization
    with \texttt{ggplot2}} workshop. Every workshop works in an RStudio project,
    containing a master R Markdown file, a data folder containing the
    data used in the workshop, and the handout produced for attendees.} 
    \label{fig:cloud}
\end{figure}

% Especially important during an introductory workshop,
% unexpected hiccups around package installation, data transfer, or the working
% directory do not arise. 
% 
% All of the participants' changes are stored locally in their RStudio Cloud workspace, which they have the ability to access for years to come. Additionally, RStudio Cloud provides interactive tutorials covering key skills in learning to program in \texttt{R}. 

\subsubsection{Why R Markdown Documents?}

\quad R Markdown documents provide an easy-to-understand framework to combine
statistical computing and written analysis in a single document, helping to
break the copy-paste paradigm for generating statistical reports 
\citep{mine-rmarkdown}. During the workshop, R Markdown documents allow for 
attendees to keep their code organized and their workspace clean, which is
unnatural for new learners. Each workshop's master R Markdown document contains
blocks of code and descriptions for every topic covered, allowing for
participants' exploratory work to be saved within a topic. For additional
information on R Markdown documents see \citeauthor{mine-rmarkdown} 
(\citeyear{mine-rmarkdown}). 

\subsection{Workshop Content}

\subsubsection{Introduction to \texttt{R}}
\label{sec:introR}

\quad This first workshop in the series covers the basics of learning to program
in \texttt{R}. The workshop first introduces the RStudio environment and project
work flow in RStudio, discussing project working directories and relative paths.
Next, the workshop progresses through tools for working with vectors and lists 
of different data types, motivating methods for working with dataframes. After
learning how to import data into \texttt{R}, the workshop proceeds through
inspecting data, extracting data, and changing data types. Motivated by
obtaining unexpected summary statistics when working with missing data, the
workshop introduces \texttt{R} help files to inspect function arguments and
their default values. These help files are called upon as participants make use 
of base \texttt{R} functions to create data summaries, perform simple data
cleaning, and produce both univariate and bivariate visualizations of the data. 

\subsubsection{Intermediate \texttt{R}}
\label{sec:intermed}


\quad This second workshop in the series builds off of the content covered in 
\emph{Introduction to \texttt{R}}, without any expectations of attendees having
additional knowledge or skills. The workshop begins with a review of creating
objects in \texttt{R} and working with vectors and dataframes. The workshop then
progresses through the use of relational statements and how to link these 
statements using and (\texttt{\&}), or (\texttt{|}), and not (\texttt{!})
conjunctions. Next, the workshop dives into the use of conditional statements,
stepping from \texttt{if}, to \texttt{if else}, to \texttt{else if} statements. 

\quad The second half of the workshop covers methods to iterate or replicate the
same set of instructions many times. For-loops are introduced as a popular way
to iterate or replicate the same set of instructions many times. Participants
work through examples of a for-loop and a recursive for-loop, in the context of
repeated operations on a dataset. These exercises motivate a discussion of why
\texttt{R} users recommend the use of vectorization for non-recursive for-loops. 
Next, functions are presented as an approach to replicate the same set
of instructions in multiple locations throughout your code. Persuaded by a 
script which copies and pastes the same process multiple times, participants
understand the difficulty in discerning the underlying process and spotting
mistakes. Subsequently, participants are tasked with transforming this 
copy-paste-modify process into a function. By parsing out the function writing
process into a set of steps that one walks through once you've copied and pasted
your code multiple times, participants have a more intuitive sense for why 
functions are useful and how they can create them in their own code.

\quad The content in this workshop, excluding relational statements, is not
included in Data Carpentry's \emph{Data Analysis and Visualization in \texttt{R}
for Ecologists} lesson. Instead, many of these concepts are covered in Software
Carpentry's \emph{\texttt{R} for Reproducible Scientific Analysis} lesson. Yet,
creating modularized code---which uses conditional statements, for-loops, and
user-defined functions---are skills that many environmental science faculty
asserted were necessary for graduate students to possess as they perform
independent research.  


\subsubsection{Data Wrangling with \texttt{dplyr} and \texttt{tidyr}}
\label{sec:wrangle}

\quad Following the \emph{Intermediate \texttt{R}} workshop, the \emph{Data 
Wrangling} workshop continues forward with common data wrangling issues faced by
environmental science researchers. Inspired by the difficulty of reading bracket
subsetting and how cumbersome it can be to remember the different base 
\texttt{R} functions and formats to wrangle your data, this workshop introduces 
the \texttt{dplyr} \citep{dpylr} and \texttt{tidyr} \citep{tidyr} packages from
the \texttt{tidyverse} \citep{tidyverse}. Much of \texttt{R}'s language has not
changed over the last 20 years, which leaves the desire for a ``smoother, more
efficient, and more readable pipeline for modern \texttt{R} workflows'' (Ross, 
Wickham, \& Robinson, \citeyear{tidytools}, p. 19). The \texttt{tidyverse}
packages share common interfaces and data structures that make it simpler to
learn data wrangling tasks and allow for the process to flow naturally from one
step to the next. 

% Add references to how the tidyverse simplifies cognitive load when learning to program in R


\quad The workshop begins by outlining six of the common ``verbs'' that handle
common data wrangling challenges, included in the  \texttt{dplyr} package. 
Participants learn how to select columns with \texttt{select()}, filter rows 
with \texttt{filter()}, add new columns and modify existing columns with 
\texttt{mutate()}, create a table of summary measures by groups using 
\texttt{summarise()} and \texttt{group\_by()}, and change the ordering of a 
tables rows with \texttt{arrange()}. Prompted by the need to perform a sequence
of multiple data wrangling operations, participants learn how to connect each of
these data wrangling verbs using the pipe operator (\texttt{\%>\%}). Next, the
concept of relational data is outlined, motivated by the need to
integrate additional data files for analysis. Participants are introduced to the
idea of key-value pairs and then use these pairs to map how the data they have
been working can be joined with additional data files. Participants use the 
\texttt{left\_join()} and  \texttt{right\_join()} functions to join two 
additional datasets. . 

\quad The final topic of the workshop involves data reorganization. Until now, 
participants were were presented with ``tidy'' data, where every observation is
one row, each variable has a column, and every value has one cell. The idea of 
``tidy'' data is used to describe `long' and `wide' data formats. The 
\texttt{tidyr} package is introduced to alleviate the burden of data 
reorganizations, when transforming data from one layout to another, using the 
\texttt{pivot\_wider()} and \texttt{pivot\_longer()} functions. In groups, 
participants work through a final exercise, first creating a data summary for
multiple groups, then pivoting these values across multiple columns, and finally
recombining these multiple columns into a single column. 


\subsubsection{Data Visualization with \texttt{ggplot2}}
\label{sec:vizual} 

\quad The final workshop in the series dives into creating data visualizations
using the \texttt{ggplot2} package \citep{ggplot}. Rather than remembering a
list of functions that make different visualizations, each with it's own unique
syntax, arguments, inputs, and outputs, \texttt{ggplot2} creates a uniform
interface with functions that each solve a particular class of problems. This
uniform syntax and ``vocabulary for describing the elements of a statistical 
plot'' \citep[p.\ 261]{nolan-viz}, allows participants to create more dynamic 
visualizations out of the gate. This workshop works with the joined data from 
the close of the \emph{Data Wrangling} workshop, first using a scatterplot to 
illuminate the discussion of the \texttt{ggplot()} syntax.

\quad Participants learn about the \texttt{mapping} argument for specifying
aesthetics (\texttt{aes}) for the plot and the set of \texttt{geom} functions 
which define the type of plot you produce. By making explicit connections
between the addition operator (\texttt{+}) and the pipe operator, participants
understand addition to be an intuitive metaphor for adding layers to a plot. 
Next, the workshop examines how to modify the \texttt{ggplot()} aesthetics and 
geoms to create violin plots, density plots, bar charts, and line plots. Each of
these plots allow for participants to explore different \texttt{geom} functions
and the aesthetics that pair with each plot. A conversation is had about the
importance of plotting raw data rather than simply aggregate measures of the
data, and the difficulties that might arise. Similar to the advise of Nolan and
Perrett \citeyear{nolan-viz}, adding a \texttt{geom\_point()} or 
\texttt{geom\_jitter()} layer to a visualization highlights tools that can be 
used so graph elements don't interfere with the data (e.g. jittering,
transparency). Finally, faceting, using \texttt{facet\_wrap()} and
\texttt{facet\_grid()}, is introduced as an additional visualization tool to
facilitate multivariate comparisons \citep[p.\ 261]{nolan-viz}. 

\quad By this point in the workshop, participants have posed many questions on
how to modify aspects of a plot that don't depend on the geom. For the final 
section of the workshop, the group walks through different customizations one 
can make to each \texttt{ggplot} object, to add clarity and information to the 
plot. Participants learn how to flip a plot's coordinate, how to make
customizations of the plot's labels, the size of the points, the thickness of
lines, the appearance of the plotting window, and the color scheme used. Each of
these customizations continue to emphasize to participants the iterative nature 
of creating data visualizations, transforming a simple plot step-by-step ``into
a graph that is data rich and presents a clear vision of the important features
of the data'' \citep[p.\ 262]{nolan-viz}.

\section{Evaluating Data Science Workshops}
\label{sec:implement}

\quad The final phase of this research explored the backgrounds and experiences
of workshop attendees. For the first iteration of this research, attention was
paid to understanding the backgrounds of the workshop attendees, their
experiences learning \texttt{R}, their motivation for attending the workshop(s),
and their experiences in each workshop. Evaluating the learning outcomes of
these workshops is left as future research. 

\quad These tailored workshops were offered each semester of the 2018-2019 
academic year. Each workshop lasted a total of three hours. The 
\emph{Introduction to \texttt{R}} workshop was offered two weeks after the start
of the semester, followed by \emph{Intermediate \texttt{R}}, \emph{Data 
Wrangling}, and \emph{Data Visualization}, with an average of three weeks
between workshops. In the week prior to each workshop, a pre-workshop survey is
sent out to those registered through a Google Form. This survey details 
individuals' demographics and backgrounds prior to the workshop. In the week
following each workshop, attendees are asked to complete a post-workshop survey,
detailing their experiences in the workshop. The content of these surveys was
informed from the pre- and post-workshop surveys developed by the Carpentries
\footnote{This work is a derivative of the Carpentries pre- and post-workshop
survey materials \href{https://github.com/carpentries/assessment/}{(https://github.com/carpentries/assessment/)}, used under CC-BY \href{https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/}{(https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/)}, with revisions to the disciplines and occupations, and removal of questions
regarding the degree of agreement with statements provided}. The full pre- and
post-workshop surveys are included as supplementary materials.

\subsection{Backgrounds of Workshop Participants}

{\spacingset{1.05}
\begin{figure}[h!]
\centering
\includegraphics[width = \textwidth]{images/better_colors_attendance.png}
\caption{Number of attendees by department and current occupation, selected from
an itemized list of campus departments and positions.}
    \label{fig:departments}
\end{figure}
}

\quad A total of 150 students, faculty, and staff attended at least one of the
workshops, and we obtained 121 complete survey responses. Of these responses, a 
total of 64 individuals attended the \emph{Introduction to \texttt{R}} workshop,
40 attended \emph{Intermediate \texttt{R}}, and 9 attended each of the 
\emph{Data Wrangling} and \emph{Data Visualization} workshops. The
majority of the workshop attendees were in biological fields---from departments
such as Land Resources and Environmental Sciences (LRES), Ecology, Plant
Sciences, Biochemistry or Microbiology, Animal and Range Sciences, and Earth
Sciences. Additionally, over 60\% of workshop attendees were masters and
doctoral students. It is worth noting, however, that 18 faculty, staff, and
postdocs also attended these workshops. Figure \ref{fig:departments} displays
the department affiliations of the workshop attendees and their current 
occupation. 

\quad Consistent with the environmental science literature \citep{andelman, 
hampton, hernandez, datacarpentry}, a large number of workshop participants were
either unfamiliar with the concept of a programming language or had no
experience with any programming languages. Nearly 60\% of attendees reported no experiences with any programming
languages, 20\% reported experiences working in \texttt{R}, and 30\% reported
experiences with other programming languages (e.g. MatLab, SQL, Java, C). 

\quad Many attendees, however, stated that they had taken courses in statistics.
The majority of participants reported having either undergraduate of graduate
experiences with an introductory level statistics course. Notably, over 15\% of
attendees reported having no formal statistical training. Most graduate students
had enrolled in discipline-specific introductory statistics courses in their own
department or a graduate-level applied statistics course offered by the
Department of Mathematical Sciences. Table \ref{tab:statistics} consolidates 
themes of workshop participants' previous statistical experiences, when asked to
report the statistics courses they have taken over the course of their
education. 

{\spacingset{1.05}
\begin{table}[h!]
    \centering
    \begin{tabular}{lc}
\hline
Stat Courses & Participants \\
\hline
Introductory Statistics & 46 \\
Applied Statistics & 42 \\
None & 24 \\
Discipline Specific Introductory Statistics & 20 \\
Intermediate Statistics & 10 \\
Experimental Design	& 8 \\
Probability Theory	& 6 \\
Statistical Computing & 3 \\
Sampling & 3 \\
Biostatistics & 2 \\
Spatial Analysis & 2 \\
Econometrics & 1 \\
Time Series Analysis & 1 \\
\hline
\end{tabular}
\caption{Workshop attendees' responses to the question ``What are your previous
statistical experience(s)?  List course names.,'' thematically organized based
on content of the course.}
\label{tab:statistics}
\end{table}
}

\subsection{Motivation for Attending} 

\quad As expected from the prevalence of the use of \texttt{R} in environmental
science research \citep{Rpopular, mislan}, over half of the master's, doctoral, 
and post-doc workshop participants attended for assistance with their research. 
Others were seeking additional assistance for learning the \texttt{R} skills
necessary for their coursework, refreshing or updating their \texttt{R}
skills to include new tools they were unfamiliar with(e.g. \texttt{ggplot}, 
\texttt{dplyr}), or undergraduates preparing for graduate school.  

\quad As echoed by previous studies of environmental science graduate students
\citep{datacarpentry, theobold}, attendees overwhelmingly stated that they
primarily use the internet (27\%), their peers (21\%), or their lab mates (15\%) 
when learning \texttt{R}. Based on the statistical backgrounds of these
participants and the statistics education literature on computing in the
statistics classroom, it is not surprising that nearly two-thirds of these 
individuals reported using resources other than course materials as their main 
resource for learning \texttt{R}. 

\subsection{Reflections of Workshop Participants} 

\quad Every participant attending the workshops reported that they felt the
workshop environment to be welcoming, with many participants voicing that the
``enthusiasm of the instructor'' was the best part of the workshop. The
percentage of individuals reporting that all of the information presented was 
new to them differed by workshop, with 40\% of \emph{Introduction to \texttt{R}}
participants, 30\% of \emph{Intermediate \texttt{R}} participants, 80\% in 
\emph{Data Wrangling}, and 50\% in \emph{Data Visualization}. Across every
workshop, nearly all participants stated that they ``strongly agreed'' that they
``learned skills that [they] will be able to use in [their] research/work.'' 
Over 75\% of the workshop participants reported that they would use the skills
they learned in their research immediately or in the next 30 days. Numerous
participants expressed that ``[in their field] the value of learning \texttt{R}
cannot be underestimated,'' because ``[\texttt{R}] is an essential tool for
researchers.'' While, a number of graduate students reflected on the importance
of these workshops ``filling a critical hole in the curriculum of many college
programs.''
 
\quad The themes which emerged from these attendees' reflections to what they 
enjoyed most about the workshop were hands-on learning, workshop atmosphere,
instructor attributes, and confidence. Many individuals commented on how walking
through the code step-by-step made the information more clear, and how this
process left them feeling more ``confident figuring things out on my own, now 
that I understand the general lay out and `way' commands or functions are set
up.'' Furthermore, these participants voiced that the workshop left them with a
more substantial feeling of independence, because ``I have a better
understanding of how to read code, what certain symbols/terms/etc mean and how
they work'' and ``I feel like I can better interpret [\texttt{ggplot}] code to
work through it better individually now.'' Participants expressed that the
hands-on exercises used throughout the workshops also contributed to 
``fostering a much greater level of understanding.'' This deeper level of
understanding was facilitated by providing participants with an adequate
amount of time to ``explore \texttt{R} on our own'' and then spending time, as a
group, talking through a variety of ways to address the task at hand. Some
individuals who reported using the internet as a resource to learn \texttt{R}
stated that ``it's easy to walk away from \texttt{R} workshops wondering if
anything was learned, however the exercises were a clear tool which allow me to
see what I gained.''  

\section{Sustainability of Workshops}  
\label{sec:sustainability}

\quad To facilitate the sustainability of these workshops, we forged a
partnership between our institution's library and the Department of Mathematical
Science's Statistical Consulting and Research Services (SCRS). A university's
library is an optimal unit for offering these workshops, as it is both
department-agnostic and a central hub for the entire university community.
Furthermore, by partnering with a organization that provides statistical
consulting, workshop participants are provided with a potential avenue if
difficulties or additional questions arise. A key consideration, so that 
workshop instructors are not burdened being contacted by workshop attendees for 
additional assistance. 

\quad A data-engagement grant from the National Network of Libraries of Medicine
during the 2018-2019 academic year supported the primary author in carrying out  
this research, leading the workshops, becoming a Carpentries certified
instructor, and incorporating the results of this research into the broader
Data and Software Carpentry curricula. During the 2019-2020 academic
year, the university awarded the project a \$5,000 faculty excellence grant to
implement a ``train-the-trainer'' model to train future graduate student
instructors. Three students were recruited from the masters and doctoral
programs in statistics, but because of the widespread use of \texttt{R} across
scientific fields, students from a variety of backgrounds hold the potential to
be effective instructors. During the fall semester, the primary author and these
students met for one hour a week to build students' facilities and confidence
instructing each workshop. Students were expected to work with the primary
author to teach a 30-minute portion of each workshop during the fall semester,
and to act as workshop helpers when not instructing. During the spring, the
students worked together to instruct the entire workshop series.  

% \quad Currently, this design research is focusing on incorporating the content of these workshops into the \emph{Data Analysis and Visualization in \texttt{R}} lesson within Data Carpentry's Ecology curriculum. Infusing the skills outlined in this research into the \emph{Data Analysis and Visualization in \texttt{R} for Ecologists} lesson helps to create a Carpentries curriculum that best reflects the ``core data skills'' necessary for data-intensive environmental science research. For skills outlined by this research where there is no room in the current \emph{Data Analysis and Visualization in \texttt{R} for Ecologists} lesson, the Carpentries Incubator and Carpentries Lab provide potential avenues to produce additional lesson materials that are broadly available to The Carpentries community. These avenues allow for the continued discussion of the importance of integrating user-defined functions, conditional statements, and loops into the broader Data Carpentry Ecology curriculum.    

\quad As the Carpentries materials are publicly available for use and 
adaptation with acknowledgement, the Carpentries does not require training for 
instructors to use their content. However, if the institution desires to 
advertise their workshops as Carpentries workshops, this can be accomplished in
two ways, (1) the lead instructor is a Carpentries certified instructor, or (2)
the institution requests a workshop through the Carpentries, who then recruits 
instructors for a fee. Through the primary author completing the Carpentries
instructor training, we were able to offer self-organized workshops interweaving 
the content from both Data and Software Carpentry workshops. Additionally, 
through this experience the primary author was able to guide the future 
workshop instructors through the process of becoming certified instructors. 

\quad Similar to the Explorations in Statistics Research workshop model 
\citep{esr}, the ``standard'' Carpentries workshop format takes place over an 
intensive two days. Self-organized workshops allow for the added flexibility of 
tailoring this format more conducive for busy students, faculty, and staff.
Yet, institutions should be aware of the benefits and costs of this 
revised format. Additional time between each workshop helps to alleviate the
brain fatigue experienced in intensive workshops and allows for participants to 
select what workshops are relevant to the skills they wish to acquire. However, 
in this extended format, workshops after \emph{Introduction to \texttt{R}} 
were potentially considered ``specialized'' workshops and experienced a 
decrease in attendance. At an academic institution, there is also the
possibility of integrating a workshop series into a single credit course, to 
sustainably support their instruction. When considering this as an option, 
however, institutions should think critically about how faculty and staff can 
still participate in these critical learning opportunities. Alternatively,
institutions could offer undergraduate students the option of assisting in the 
implementation of these workshops for course credit, and allow for the
possibility of students becoming lead or co-instructors as they progress through
their program. 

\section{Limitations \& Future Research} 
\label{sec:future}

\quad The sentiments heard by these faculty unearth the possibility that many
faculty may be largely unaware of the computing skills necessary for their 
graduate students to participate in the entire data analysis cycle. Instead, 
students may have more relevant knowledge regarding the data science skills that
are necessary for their research. Hence, the next iteration of this design work
will be informed by the collection of the research (\texttt{R}) code produced by
environmental science graduate students. Graduate students' research code
provides insight into the key data science skills students are using to engage 
in the data analysis process for their independent research. The skills outlined
by this research aid in re-evaluating the content of these workshops, to ensure
they cover the skills necessary for graduate-level environmental science
research. 

\quad Additionally, the attendance of these workshops by students, faculty, and
staff from disciplines outside of the environmental sciences brings to question
whether this type of tailored design work is necessary. While these workshops
were originally designed to facilitate environmental science graduate students'
acquisition of computing skills, over a third of the workshop attendees came
from disciplines outside of this focus. Strikingly, these attendees reported
similar workshop experiences to attendees from these targeted disciplines. This
brings to question if there are common computational understandings necessary
for research in \emph{any} scientific field, which should be infused into
\emph{every} statistics and data science course. Alternatively, in this research
we saw a larger number of attendees from environmental science fields persist
across workshops, rather than solely attending \emph{Introduction to 
\texttt{R}}. What are the drivers behind these individuals' continued
attendance? Future research focusing on the learning outcomes of the workshop
attendees could provide fruitful insight on the necessity of these
discipline-specific learning opportunities. 

% Research on drift/questions in WS
\quad Finally, despite the increasing availability of extracurricular 
workshops, no research has investigated the consistency or drift of workshop
curricula. In this research, because of the large attendance at many
\emph{Introduction to \texttt{R}} workshops, a large number of questions would
arise over the course of the afternoon. This lead to an inability to cover some
of the workshop content in as much depth as hoped, yet some attendees remarked 
that ``with so many people, [the workshop] had better discussions.'' A large 
scale analysis of the content of these workshops could unearth common questions 
or misunderstandings, which could aid in the reconstruction of lessons to better
scaffold learning. 

\section{Conclusion}
\label{sec:conclusion}

\quad Ten years ago, Nolan and Temple Lang declared that ``modernizing the
statistics curricula to include computing [...] is an issue that deserves
widespread attention and action'' (p. 106). In 2014, the American Statistical
Association endorsed a new set of curriculum guidelines for undergraduate
programs in statistical science. These new guidelines include an increased
emphasis on data science skills and real applications, specifically students'
ability to ``access and manipulate data in various ways, use a variety of
computational approaches to extract meaning from data, program in higher-level
languages" \citep[p. 7]{asa}. While we may see these changes reflected in
undergraduate and graduate programs in statistics, integrating these topics into
graduate-level statistics service courses has received less attention and poses
different issues. 

\quad Statistics courses that serve a variety of students (undergraduate,
graduate, statistics major, non-major) reflect a snapshot of the statistics
curriculum, but often act as many students' sole statistics course prior to
conducting scientific research. Instructors of these courses thus grapple with 
difficult decisions of how they can ensure their students have both the
statistical and ``computational understanding, skills, and confidence needed to
actively and wholeheartedly participate'' in the scientific research arena 
\citep[p. 106]{nolan}. For instructors unfamiliar with students' scientific
disciplines, it can be difficult to ``be bold and design curricula from
scratch'' \citep[p. 106]{nolan}. The topics suggested by Nolan and Temple Lang
(2010), represent a starting point toward building a taxonomy for computing in
statistics for undergraduate and graduate statistics programs. These topics,
however, may not be relevant to or emphasized by other scientific disciplines
whose students enroll in graduate-level statistics service courses.  In our
research, we found that environmental science faculty stressed the importance of
graduate students developing skills surrounding the fundamentals of working with
data in \texttt{R}, software skills for data processing and preparation, 
creation of data visualizations, and usage of reproducible work flows. 

\quad The time is ripe for us to ``update the foundational concepts and
infrastructure'' \citep[p.\ 5]{crossroads} included in statistics service
courses, in the new era of data science. As we work toward a more thorough
integration of computing into these courses, this research offers a model for
facilitating external workshops---supporting university-wide data science
literacy. External workshops hold the opportunity for co-curricular learning,
when paired with statistics service courses, so students leave their statistics
service course with the computing skills necessary to engage in the entire data
analysis cycle. Moreover, these workshops provide avenues for university faculty
to acquire data science knowledge and skills which ``they have not had the 
opportunity to learn well'' \citep[p. 106]{nolan}, and provide resources and
tools for instructors to meaningfully integrate discipline specific computing 
skills into their classroom. 

\section{Acknowledgements}

We would like to specially thank the participants from this study, without whom
this research would not have been possible. We would also like to thank the
workshop helpers for their time and assistance, helping to grow the data
literacy across our campus. 


\bibliography{ref}
\bibliographystyle{apalike}

\end{document}
